Add multi part aof information (#1724)
redis/redis-doc: topics/persistence.md

Redis provides a different range of persistence options:

* **RDB** (Redis Database): The RDB persistence performs point-in-time snapshots of your dataset at specified intervals.
* **AOF** (Append Only File): The AOF persistence logs every write operation received by the server, that will be played again at server startup, reconstructing the original dataset. Commands are logged using the same format as the Redis protocol itself, in an append-only fashion. Redis is able to rewrite the log in the background when it gets too big.    

>   Since Redis 7.0.0, Redis supports the Multi Part AOF mechanism. That is, the original single AOF file is split into BASE file (at most one) and INCR file (there may be more than one). The BASE file represents an initial (RDB or AOF format) snapshot of the data present when the AOF is rewritten. The INCR file contains incremental commands since the last base AOF file was created. All these files are tracked by a manifest file.

Author: OK

Redis provides a different range of persistence options:

* **RDB** (Redis Database): The RDB persistence performs point-in-time snapshots of your dataset at specified intervals.
* **AOF** (Append Only File): The AOF persistence logs every write operation received by the server, that will be played again at server startup, reconstructing the original dataset. Commands are logged using the same format as the Redis protocol itself, in an append-only fashion. Redis is able to rewrite the log in the background when it gets too big.    

> 
>   Since Redis 7.0.0, Redis supports the Multi Part AOF mechanism.
>   That is, the original single AOF file is split into base file (at most one) and incremental files (there may be more than one).
>   The base file represents an initial (RDB or AOF format) snapshot of the data present when the AOF is rewritten.
>   The incremental files contains incremental commands since the last base AOF file was created. All these files are put in a separate folder and are tracked by a manifest file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <br/>Since Redis 7.0.0, Redis supports a multi part AOF mechanism.
  That is, the original single AOF file is split into base file (at most one) and incremental files (there may be more than one).
  The base file represents an initial (RDB or AOF format) snapshot of the data present when the AOF is rewritten.
  The incremental files contains incremental commands since the last base AOF file was created. All these files are put in a separate directory and are tracked by a manifest file.
```

Author: OK

* Using AOF Redis is much more durable: you can have different fsync policies: no fsync at all, fsync every second, fsync at every query. With the default policy of fsync every second write performances are still great (fsync is performed using a background thread and the main thread will try hard to perform writes when no fsync is in progress.) but you can only lose one second worth of writes.
* The AOF log is an append only log, so there are no seeks, nor corruption problems if there is a power outage. Even if the log ends with an half-written command for some reason (disk full or other reasons) the redis-check-aof tool is able to fix it easily.
* Redis is able to automatically rewrite the AOF in background when it gets too big. The rewrite is completely safe as while Redis continues appending to the old file, a completely new one is produced with the minimal set of operations needed to create the current data set, and once this second file is ready Redis switches the two and starts appending to the new one.

>   Since Redis 7.0.0, the rewrite is also completely safe. When an AOF rewrite is scheduled, Redis parent process opens a new INCR AOF file to continue writing. The child process will execute rewrite logic and generates a new BASE AOF. Redis will use a temporary manifest file to track the newly generated BASE file and INCR file. When they are ready, Redis will perform an atomic replacement operation to make this temporary manifest file take effect.At the same time, in order to avoid the problem of creating many INCR files due to the frequent failure and retries of AOF rewrite. Redis introduced an AOF rewrite limiting mechanism to ensure that AOF rewrite automatically retries at a slower and slower speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Since Redis 7.0.0, the rewrite is also completely safe. When an AOF rewrite is scheduled, The Redis parent process opens a new INCR AOF file to continue writing. The child process will execute rewrite logic and generates a new BASE AOF. Redis will use a temporary manifest file to track the newly generated BASE file and INCR file. When they are ready, Redis will perform an atomic replacement operation to make this temporary manifest file take effect. At the same time, in order to avoid the problem of creating many INCR files in case of repeated failures and retries of an AOF rewrite, Redis introduces an AOF rewrite limiting mechanism to ensure that AOF rewrite automatically retries at a slower and slower speed.
```

Author: OK

>   Since Redis 7.0.0, the rewrite is also completely safe. When an AOF rewrite is scheduled, Redis parent process opens a new INCR AOF file to continue writing. The child process will execute rewrite logic and generates a new BASE AOF. Redis will use a temporary manifest file to track the newly generated BASE file and INCR file. When they are ready, Redis will perform an atomic replacement operation to make this temporary manifest file take effect.At the same time, in order to avoid the problem of creating many INCR files due to the frequent failure and retries of AOF rewrite. Redis introduced an AOF rewrite limiting mechanism to ensure that AOF rewrite automatically retries at a slower and slower speed.

Author: OK

> 

Reviewer: Should probably move to the `log rewriting` section below.

> 

Author: ok

* AOF contains a log of all the operations one after the other in an easy to understand and parse format. You can even easily export an AOF file. For instance even if you've accidentally flushed everything using the `FLUSHALL` command, as long as no rewrite of the log was performed in the meantime, you can still save your data set just by stopping the server, removing the latest command, and restarting Redis again.

> AOF disadvantages

Reviewer 2: it's odd that i don't see these disadvantages being listed:
* using a lot of memory if there are writes to the database during a rewrite (these are buffered and written to the new AOF at the end)
* all writes that arrive during rewrite are written twice.
* server could freeze writing and fsyncing these writes to the new AOF file

so maybe we should list them as disadvantages for versions before 7?

Author: Agree, I think it might have been deliberately circumventing this before?

Reviewer 2: i don't think deliberately. maybe the severity wasn't realized when this doc was first created, and didn't bother to update later.

* The AOF log is an append only log, so there are no seeks, nor corruption problems if there is a power outage. Even if the log ends with an half-written command for some reason (disk full or other reasons) the redis-check-aof tool is able to fix it easily.
* AOF contains a log of all the operations one after the other in an easy to understand and parse format. You can even easily export an AOF file. For instance even if you've accidentally flushed everything using the `FLUSHALL` command, as long as no rewrite of the log was performed in the meantime, you can still save your data set just by stopping the server, removing the latest command, and restarting Redis again.

AOF disadvantages
---

* AOF files are usually bigger than the equivalent RDB files for the same dataset.
* AOF can be slower than RDB depending on the exact fsync policy. In general with fsync set to *every second* performance is still very high, and with fsync disabled it should be exactly as fast as RDB even under high load. Still RDB is able to provide more guarantees about the maximum latency even in the case of an huge write load.

> * Using a lot of memory if there are writes to the database during a rewrite (these are buffered in memory and written to the new AOF at the end).

Reviewer: Isn't this removed with the new muti-part AOF mechanism? Now we write the new writes to the new incremental file, don't we?

Reviewer 2: i asked to add these 3 disadvantages, but it should be clear that these are issues relevant only to versions before 7.
maybe make a sub-section for pre-7.0 disadvantages?

Author: Yes, i think i should add **Redis < 7.0** and  **Redis >= 7.0** to splite them?

Reviewer 2: not sure if we should split it all..
there could be some generic disadvantages that apply to all.
and then some version specific disadvantages

Author: @oranagra I think we should delete this sentence: `In the past we experienced rare bugs in specific commands (for instance there was one involving blocking commands like BRPOPLPUSH) causing the AOF produced to not reproduce exactly the same dataset on reloading. These bugs are rare and we have tests in the test suite creating ran`，We should talk about the disadvantages of AOF, not its previous bugs, WDYT?

Reviewer 2: yes, i agree it's outdated...
i also think we can afford to delete this odd thing:
```
We have never had a single report from users about an AOF corruption that was detected in the real world.
  ```

Author: agree

> * All writes that arrive during rewrite are written twice.

Reviewer: In normal operation this shouldn't happen, they are written only to the new incremental file aren't they?

> * Redis could freeze writing and fsyncing these writes to the new AOF file at the end.

Reviewer: What do you mean? If we continue writing as normal to the new incr file during the rewrite then why would we freeze?

* The AOF log is an append only log, so there are no seeks, nor corruption problems if there is a power outage. Even if the log ends with an half-written command for some reason (disk full or other reasons) the redis-check-aof tool is able to fix it easily.
* AOF contains a log of all the operations one after the other in an easy to understand and parse format. You can even easily export an AOF file. For instance even if you've accidentally flushed everything using the `FLUSHALL` command, as long as no rewrite of the log was performed in the meantime, you can still save your data set just by stopping the server, removing the latest command, and restarting Redis again.

AOF disadvantages
---

* AOF files are usually bigger than the equivalent RDB files for the same dataset.
* AOF can be slower than RDB depending on the exact fsync policy. In general with fsync set to *every second* performance is still very high, and with fsync disabled it should be exactly as fast as RDB even under high load. Still RDB is able to provide more guarantees about the maximum latency even in the case of an huge write load.

> **Redis < 7.0**

Reviewer: Missing newline (breaks markdown bullet formatting)
```suggestion
**Redis < 7.0**

```

Author: OK

> * Using a lot of memory if there are writes to the database during a rewrite (these are buffered in memory and written to the new AOF at the end).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* AOF can use a lot of memory if there are writes to the database during a rewrite (these are buffered in memory and written to the new AOF at the end).
```

Author: OK

> * All writes that arrive during rewrite are written twice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All write commands that arrive during rewrite are written twice.
```

Author: OK

> * Redis could freeze writing and fsyncing these writes to the new AOF file at the end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Redis could freeze writing and fsyncing these write commands to the new AOF file at the end.
```

Author: OK

Note: for all these reasons we'll likely end up unifying AOF and RDB into a single persistence model in the future (long term plan).

> Since Redis 7.0.0, when `aof-use-rdb-preamble` is set to yes, the BASE file uses RDB format.

Reviewer 2: how is this related to this section?
i think we can choose not to document that option at all.
or if we document it, we should mention the version where it was first introduced, and what it did before 7 too

Author: Pay attention to the above sentence: ”for all these reasons we'll likely end up unifying AOF and RDB into a single persistence model in the future (long term plan).“ i think when `aof-use-rdb-preamble` is set to yes, we can do that, right ?

Reviewer 2: i don't think that's it.
the section is titled `Ok, so what should I use`, and it mentions the potential for data loss, vs the overheads of AOF (constant writes, not during AOFRW)
it discusses the difference between a periodic snapshots (e.g. fork every hour), vs AOF (write every command), which has a rewrite that could be much more sparse..

it is still a long term plan for us to unify these (i.e. you can define both, and you'll end up with only AOF, but it's rewrite will be periodic).
i don't think this PR changes that.

we may choose to mention preamble somewhere (if there's a line that mentions that AOFRW is being inefficient since it generates text file), but then we'll mention the version that introduced preamble, not 7.0.
i don't think 7.0 adds a major change with regards to this section.

Author: removed

> ### Log rewriting

Reviewer 2: maybe all the test you've put in the disadvantages section that describes the rewrite in 7.0 should be moved here?

Reviewer 2: that's also the place to mention preamble if we want

Author: OK

As you can guess, the AOF gets bigger and bigger as write operations are

> performed. For example, if you are incrementing a counter 100 times,

Reviewer 2: these double spaces in the middle of the line are not rendered in the MD result.
they're not needed in the "source" but i'm not sure we need to bother removing them.

Author: Yes, but I think one day someone will specifically mention a PR to remove this space?

Reviewer 2: i'll reject it if it's in my shift..  8-)
i'm usually trying to avoid changes that are unnecessary and damage the blame log.

Author: OK

value, but 100 entries in your AOF. 99 of those entries are not needed
to rebuild the current state.

The rewrite is completely safe.
While Redis continues appending to the old file,
a completely new one is produced with the minimal set of operations needed to create the current data set,
and once this second file is ready Redis switches the two and starts appending to the new one.

Since Redis 7.0.0, when an AOF rewrite is scheduled, The Redis parent process opens a new incremental AOF file to continue writing.
The child process will execute rewrite logic and generates a new base AOF.
Redis will use a temporary manifest file to track the newly generated base file and incremental file.
When they are ready, Redis will perform an atomic replacement operation to make this temporary manifest file take effect.

> In order to avoid the problem of creating many incr files in case of repeated failures and retries of an AOF rewrite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to avoid the problem of creating many incremental files in case of repeated failures and retries of an AOF rewrite.
```

value, but 100 entries in your AOF. 99 of those entries are not needed
to rebuild the current state.

> The rewrite is completely safe as while Redis continues appending to the old file, a completely new one is produced with the minimal set of operations needed to create the current data set, and once this second file is ready Redis switches the two and starts appending to the new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rewrite is completely safe. While Redis continues appending to the old file, a completely new one is produced with the minimal set of operations needed to create the current data set, and once this second file is ready Redis switches the two and starts appending to the new one.
```

Reviewer 2: the line is quite long. it'l be easier for review, and future updates if we split it after some commas or alike, so adding a line will not create such a big diff.

Author: This is the previous document, do we need to divide them into shorter lines now?

Reviewer 2: sorry, it looked new since it was moved.
i guess that since we moved it, we can take the opportunity and break it to shorter lines.
it's not a hard rule.. just a guideline for new parts we add.

Author: OK

Since Redis 7.0.0, when an AOF rewrite is scheduled, The Redis parent process opens a new incremental AOF file to continue writing. The child process will execute rewrite logic and generates a new base AOF.
Redis will use a temporary manifest file to track the newly generated base file and incremental file.
When they are ready, Redis will perform an atomic replacement operation to make this temporary manifest file take effect.

> At the same time, in order to avoid the problem of creating many incr files in case of repeated failures and retries of an AOF rewrite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to avoid the problem of creating many incr files in case of repeated failures and retries of an AOF rewrite,
```

Author: OK

> Redis introduces an AOF rewrite limiting mechanism to ensure that AOF rewrite automatically retries at a slower and slower speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Redis introduces an AOF rewrite limiting mechanism to ensure that AOF rewrite automatically retries at a slower and slower rate.
```

Author: OK

the fact the last command in the file is not well-formed, in order to guarantee
availability after a restart.

> Since Redis 7.0.0, only the last AOF file (BASE or INCR) can be truncated. Otherwise redis will exit even if aof-load-truncated is enabled.

Reviewer 2: i don't think we need to mention it.. logically the tail of the AOF is just the last file.

Author: OK

Log rewriting uses the same copy-on-write trick already in use for
snapshotting.  This is how it works:

**Redis >= 7.0**

* Redis [forks](http://linux.die.net/man/2/fork), so now we have a child
and a parent process.

* The child starts writing the new AOF in a temporary file.

> * The parent open a new incr AOF file to continue writing. If the rewriting fails finally, the old base and incr files (if we have) plus this newly opened incr file represents a full amount of data, so we are safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The parent opens a new increments AOF file to continue writing updates. If the rewriting fails, the old base and increments files (if we have) plus this newly opened increments file represents the complete updated dataset, so we are safe.
```

Author: OK

  
* When the child is done rewriting the file, the parent gets a signal,

> and use a temporary manifest to track the newly opened incr file and sub-process generated base files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and use a temporary manifest file to track the newly opened increments file and child generated base file.
```

Author: OK

> * Profit! Now Redis do an atomic exchange to the manifest pointer in the memory, so that the result of this AOF rewrite is visible to Redis.

Reviewer: Isn't the atomic operation renaming the manifest file, not merely a change of a pointer in memory?

Author: I updated the above sentence

Log rewriting uses the same copy-on-write trick already in use for
snapshotting.  This is how it works:

**Redis >= 7.0**

* Redis [forks](http://linux.die.net/man/2/fork), so now we have a child
and a parent process.

> * The child starts writing the new AOF in a temporary file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The child starts writing the new base AOF in a temporary file.
```

* The parent opens a new increments AOF file to continue writing updates.

>   If the rewriting fails, the old base and increments files (if we have) plus this newly opened increments file represents the complete updated dataset,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the rewriting fails, the old base and increments files (if we have) plus this newly opened increments file represent the complete updated dataset,
```

Author: OK

>   If the rewriting fails, the old base and increments files (if there are any) plus this newly opened increments file represent the complete updated dataset,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the rewriting fails, the old base and increment files (if there are any) plus this newly opened increments file represent the complete updated dataset,
```

> * The parent opens a new increments AOF file to continue writing updates.
>   If the rewriting fails, the old base and increments files (if we have) plus this newly opened increments file represent the complete updated dataset,
>   so we are safe.

Reviewer 2: "increments file" sounds odd, i'd refer "incremental file"
but i see you also have "increments files", could this be "incremental files"?
```suggestion
* The parent opens a new increments AOF file to continue writing updates.
  If the rewriting fails, the old base and increments files (if there are any) plus this newly opened increments file represent the complete updated dataset,
  so we are safe.
```

Reviewer: > "increments file" sounds odd, i'd refer "incremental file"

I think the best is "increment files", i'll fix

> * When the child is done rewriting the file, the parent gets a signal,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When the child is done rewriting the base file, the parent gets a signal,
```

> and use newly opened increment file and child generated base file to build an temp manifest,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and uses the newly opened increment file and child generated base file to build a temp manifest,
```

> and uses the newly opened increment file and child generated base file to build an temp manifest,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and uses the newly opened increment file and child generated base file to build a temp manifest,
```

> and persist it.

Reviewer 2: maybe it would be clearer if we point out that there are no usually a base file and two incremental files (+manifest).

Reviewer: At this stage there's normally one new inc file, one old inc file, one new base file and one old base file. When done writing the new base file we just use it and the **new** inc file. This is what it says here. What do you think is missing?

Author: before AOFRW, we may have: `BASE1 + INCR1 + MANIFEST`
start AOFRW, we have:  `BASE1 + INCR1 + INCR2 + MANIFEST`
child process exit normally AOFRW (in doneHandler), we have:  `BASE1 + INCR1 + INCR2 + MANIFEST +  BASE2 `
AOFRW finish (del history), we have: `BASE2 + INCR2`

> * Profit! Now Redis do an atomic exchange to the manifest pointer in the memory, so that the result of this AOF rewrite is visible to Redis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Profit! Now Redis does an atomic exchange of the manifest files so that the result of this AOF rewrite takes effect. Redis also cleans up the old base file, manifest file and any unused increment files.
```

at the same time it writes the new changes in the old append-only file,
so if the rewriting fails, we are safe).

>   Since Redis 7.0.0, the mechanism here has been changed. We have dropped in-memory buffer and open a new INCR AOF file to continue writing. If the rewriting fails finally, the old BASE and INCR files (if we have) plus this newly opened INCR file represents a full amount of data, so we are safe.

Reviewer 2: i think we should split the "how it works" section into two.
one (the first one) mentions redis 7, and the other mentions older versions.
they work completely different, so there's no need to add small notes about the differences.
also, it'll be easier for the reader to just read about the version he's using.

p.s. i see you indented this line with two spaces (i assume you wanted it to be part of the last bullet). but in markdown, the empty line between them will prevent that.

p.p.s, look at the README in this folder for styling guide lines on where we want line breaks to be. (i know it's confusing since the old "code" uses a different guideline)

and let's avoid the upper case terms BASE and INCR. i think they're ok in the code, but not the docs (unless we first establish these terms in some TOC, but i don't think that's needed)

Author: OK

If you run a Redis instance with only AOF persistence enabled, you can still
copy the AOF in order to create backups. The file may lack the final part
but Redis will be still able to load it (see the previous sections about
truncated AOF files).  

Since Redis 7.0.0, all the base, incr and manifest files will be placed in a file directory determined by the `appendddirname` configuration.

> so the best suggestion is to copy the entire directory directly when backup the AOF, instead of copying some of the files, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so the best suggestion is to copy the entire directory when backing up AOF persistence.
```

Author: OK

> because Redis will do strictly check when starts, once some files are lost or messy, Redis will refuse to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: OK

If you run a Redis instance with only AOF persistence enabled, you can still
copy the AOF in order to create backups. The file may lack the final part
but Redis will be still able to load it (see the previous sections about
truncated AOF files).  

> Since Redis 7.0.0, all the base, incr and manifest files will be placed in a file directory determined by the `appendddirname` configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Redis 7.0.0, all the base, increment and manifest files will be placed in a file directory determined by the `appendddirname` configuration.
```
